---
layout: post
title: "barnacle"
description: ""
category: "old"
tags: []
---


From my old hackniac blog.

The TI-83 plus is a beautiful machine for the most part, and I love my compatible TI-84 plus. Having the ability to whip out the little device and type out a TI-BASIC program in a few minutes that could be a game, an experiment, or a proof-of-concept implementation of an algorithm I am working on is awesome and very fun for me. I would still be content with my calculator except for the fact that over the past few years I have gotten a lot better at programming, and I want more control over the machine I am programming on. Barnacle is supposed to solve this by being a device specifically designed for low-level programming on the go. It will be a pocket-sized machine that runs on batteries with a fast processor, graphical LCD, qwerty keyboard, several i/o ports, and any other features I can fit into it. These extra features might include audio hardware, wireless hardware (bluetooth or wifi), an infrared port,or sd card interface. I might add other features as I think of them. The more the better because I want to be able to have the most possibilities accessible to me through code.

Barnacle will act as a regular graphing calculator, as I am used to the things that my TI calc can do, and I have a feeling that if I didn't keep the abilities around I would sorely miss them eventually. I won't go so far as to actually emulate the internal workings of the TI calculator, but I'll write code for all the functions I have used in my TI-84, and I will partially base the structure of the operating system on the texas instruments one. When it is finished it should be able to replace my TI-84 plus for school and everything else.

This will be my first project creating a PCB from scratch, and also my first major project with SMD soldering. The use of these techniques is required because of the high number of components and because of the extremely small size when completed. To get to the final iteration of this project I'll also need to learn to use Eagle CAD and maybe even get a job to fund it (gasp).

[edit: this eventually turned into [Greyport](http://www.greyportal.com/)]
