---
layout: post
title: "moon_math"
description: ""
category: "old"
tags: []
---
 TODO
* explanation for the inaccuracy of the calculation with the actual numbers
* diagram of the problem (right triangle)
-->

During a recent long car ride my little brother was bored. Pondering idly, I guess, he asked how far away the moon is from the Earth. I felt like doing some math, so I showed him how to work out the answer to his question using only the few hazily remembered quantities we had floating around in our heads. The number we came to was 251,000 miles. It gave us great surprise to later look up the real number: 250,590 miles (only accurate for that time - it oscillates with great amplitude over time). Even though our surprising accuracy was mostly a product of luck, I'll go through how we worked the numbers.

Numbers we remembered and guesstimated:

	earth_circumference = 22,000 miles
	sky_visible = 160 degrees			// guess for how much sky we could see at the time
	moons_in_sky = 100 moons			// number of moons that could be placed next to each other across the sky we could see
	moons_in_earth = 100 moons			// how many moon diameters can fit into one Earth diamater
	
Actual numbers:

	earth_circumference = 24,901.42 miles
	sky_visible = 180 degrees			// assuming no obstructions
	moons_in_sky = 360 moons			// Wikipedia says on average moon takes up 0.5 degrees
	moons_in_earth = 3.6647 moon diam.	// asked WolframAlpha "diameter of earth / diameter of moon"
	
Our calculations:

	distance = ?
	moon_deg = sky_visible / moons_in_sky	// size of moon in sky
	earth_diameter = earth_circumference / pi
	moon_diameter = earth_diameter / moons_in_earth
	moon_radius = moon_diameter / 2
	moon_radius / distance = tan(moon_deg)
	distance = moon_radius / tan(moon_deg)
	distance = ( 22000 / pi / 2 ) / tan( 0.8 )
	distance = 250754 miles
	
The real distance between the Earth and the moon for that day was 250,590 miles (according to WolframAlpha). So we were 164 miles off. Not bad for a few minutes of guesstimation.

But we were just very lucky. Did you catch the error in our math? The radius of the moon was 'incorrect' because when I typed the math into my calculator I never entered the 100 for my brother's guess of earth_diameter / moon_diameter. The 'correct' result of our calculations can be gotten via this Haskell code:

	degtan x = tan ( 2 * pi * x / 360 )

	earth_circumference = 22000.0
	sky_visible = 160.0
	moons_in_sky = 100.0
	moons_in_earth = 100.0
	
	moon_deg = sky_visible / moons_in_sky
	earth_diameter = earth_circumference / pi
	moon_diameter = earth_diameter / moons_in_earth
	moon_radius = moon_diameter / 2
	distance = moon_radius / degtan moon_deg

	main = print distance 

It can be [executed online here](http://ideone.com/vNImRI).

The program should give 1,253.5 miles as the answer, which is a useless and bad estimation. Using the correct numbers our method does work, however:

	degtan x = tan ( 2 * pi * x / 360.0 )

	earth_circumference = 24901.42 
	sky_visible = 180.0
	moons_in_sky = 360.0
	moons_in_earth = 3.6647 

	moon_deg = sky_visible / moons_in_sky
	earth_diameter = earth_circumference / pi
	moon_diameter = earth_diameter / moons_in_earth
	moon_radius = moon_diameter / 2.0
	distance = moon_radius / degtan moon_deg

	main = print distance

It can be [executed online here](http://ideone.com/7BRTRC).

These numbers give 123,921.7 miles as the distance to the moon, which is much closer to the real average distance of 239,200 miles, but still far off. We were just very lucky that the number of moon diameters in the diameter of the Earth is much closer to 1 than 100 at 3.7.
