---
layout: post
title: "<insert title here>"
description: ""
category: "old"
tags: []
---

One day a silly idea came to me out of the blue. An optical mouse looks for a moving pattern to figure out how it is moving. I can create an arbitrary moving pattern using a computer screen. So if I were to place an optical mouse on my computer screen and show it moving patterns, the cursor should move with a controlled speed and direction.

I came up with the following two uses for this insight. Both exist as webpages (using JS / HTML5 canvas). The first also exists as a Processing sketch.

1 - Locate Mouse on Screen

Lay your PC/laptop/tablet screen flat. Place an attached optical mouse on top. Then follow this recursive algorithm:

	1. Divide screen into 4 equal pieces.
	2. For each piece display a moving pattern.
		If the mouse moved then
			Divide the current piece into 4 equal pieces
			If the pieces are too small (less than a pixel maybe) then return the location of the current piece
			Go to 2
			
Result: You've got the pixel location of the mouse sensor on the screen.

With a slightly different algorithm that tries every piece and adds ones that resulted in mouse movement to a list for later subdivision and testing, rather than short-circuiting when mouse movement is detected, you can even figure out the shape and size of the area that the mouse sensor can see.

__Uses:__ I've got no idea. My fastest prototype takes ~20 seconds to find the mouse, at best, and isn't very reliable. This is not real-time tracking. Maybe it could be foisted into the role of a controller for some kind of game.

__Improvement:__ I want to try to use a simple genetic algorithm to find better patterns to display for the mouse. Current prototype uses a pattern of random black/white, but moving it under the mouse only results in erratic movement of the cursor. Sometimes movement doesn't happen, so the mouse can't be found. The algorithm would just vary a population of patterns and test how well the movement of the cursor matches the movement of the pattern.

TODO: post Processing code
TODO: post web demo

2 - Slow Communication

The mouse from one computer is place on the screen of the other, and the information is sent from the screen 'puter to the mouse 'puter encoded as a series of direction + speeds. Most useful (marginally greater than not useful) with a smartphone or tablet as the screen/source.

There's a lot of noise, so the communication protocol has to be robust with good error checking.

As of August 20th, 2013 I've got no prototype of this idea because I can't get the cursor to move with reliable direction or speed. Need to find better patterns that are more recognizeable by the mouse.

TODO: post as a GitHub repo
